.TH LIFT 1 "January 2025" "lift 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lift \- bodybuilding workout tracker CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lift
[\fB\-\-db\-path\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-help\fR]
[\fB\-\-version\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lift
is a robust, feature-complete command-line interface for tracking weightlifting sessions with a focus on bodybuilding and progressive overload.
.PP
LIFT provides a comprehensive suite of tools for tracking exercises, logging workouts, managing training programs, analyzing performance statistics, tracking body measurements, and managing workout data.
.PP
The application uses DuckDB for high-performance analytical queries and stores all data locally in a single database file.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-db\-path " " \fIPATH\fR
Specify a custom database path. Default: ~/.lift/lift.duckdb
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Show program version and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Database Management
.TP
.B init
Initialize the database and load seed data (137 exercises).
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-force
Force reinitialization of an existing database.
.RE
.TP
.B info
Display database information and table statistics.
.TP
.B version
Display version information.
.SS Exercise Management
.TP
.B exercises list
List all exercises with optional filtering.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-category " " \fICATEGORY\fR
Filter by category (Push, Pull, Legs, Core).
.TP
.BR \-\-muscle " " \fIMUSCLE\fR
Filter by primary muscle group.
.TP
.BR \-\-equipment " " \fIEQUIPMENT\fR
Filter by equipment type.
.TP
.BR \-\-summary
Show summary statistics instead of full list.
.RE
.TP
.B exercises search
\fIQUERY\fR
Search exercises by name.
.TP
.B exercises info
\fINAME\fR
Display detailed information about a specific exercise.
.TP
.B exercises stats
Show exercise library statistics.
.TP
.B exercises add
Add a custom exercise (interactive).
.TP
.B exercises delete
\fINAME\fR
Delete a custom exercise.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompt.
.RE
.SS Workout Tracking
.TP
.B workout start
Start an interactive workout session.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-name " " \fINAME\fR
Name for the workout session.
.TP
.BR \-\-program " " \fIPROGRAM\fR
Start workout from a program template.
.PP
During a workout session, log sets using shortcuts:
.RS
.TP
.I 185 10
185 lbs × 10 reps
.TP
.I 185 10 8.5
185 lbs × 10 reps @ RPE 8.5
.TP
.I s
Same as previous set
.TP
.I +5
Add 5 lbs to previous weight
.TP
.I -5 8
Subtract 5 lbs, 8 reps
.TP
.I done
Finish current exercise
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B workout last
Display details of the last workout.
.TP
.B workout history
Show workout history.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-limit " " \fIN\fR
Limit number of workouts shown (default: 10).
.RE
.TP
.B workout show
\fIWORKOUT_ID\fR
Display detailed information about a specific workout.
.TP
.B workout delete
\fIWORKOUT_ID\fR
Delete a workout.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompt.
.RE
.SS Program Management
.TP
.B program create
Create a new training program (interactive).
.TP
.B program list
List all training programs.
.TP
.B program show
\fINAME\fR
Display detailed program information.
.TP
.B program activate
\fINAME\fR
Set a program as active.
.TP
.B program clone
\fISOURCE\fR \fIDESTINATION\fR
Clone an existing program.
.TP
.B program delete
\fINAME\fR
Delete a program.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompt.
.RE
.TP
.B program import-samples
Import sample programs (PPL 6-Day, Upper/Lower 4-Day, Full Body 3-Day).
.SS Statistics & Analytics
.TP
.B stats summary
Show training summary.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-week
Show weekly summary.
.TP
.BR \-\-month
Show monthly summary.
.RE
.TP
.B stats exercise
\fINAME\fR
Show statistics for a specific exercise.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-chart
Display progression chart.
.RE
.TP
.B stats volume
Analyze training volume.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-weeks " " \fIN\fR
Number of weeks to analyze (default: 4).
.RE
.TP
.B stats pr
Show personal records.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-exercise " " \fINAME\fR
Show PRs for specific exercise.
.RE
.TP
.B stats muscle
\fIMUSCLE\fR
Analyze volume for a specific muscle group.
.TP
.B stats streak
Show current training streak.
.TP
.B stats progress
\fIEXERCISE\fR
Show detailed progression for an exercise.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-chart
Display progression chart.
.RE
.SS Body Tracking
.TP
.B body weight
\fIWEIGHT\fR
Log bodyweight.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-unit " " \fIUNIT\fR
Weight unit (lbs or kg).
.RE
.TP
.B body measure
Log full body measurements (interactive).
.TP
.B body history
View measurement history.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-measurement " " \fINAME\fR
Specific measurement (weight, chest, waist, etc.).
.TP
.BR \-\-weeks " " \fIN\fR
Number of weeks to show (default: 12).
.TP
.BR \-\-limit " " \fIN\fR
Maximum number of entries (default: 20).
.RE
.TP
.B body progress
Show progress comparison.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-weeks " " \fIN\fR
Compare with N weeks ago (default: 4).
.RE
.TP
.B body chart
\fIMEASUREMENT\fR
Display terminal chart for a measurement.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-weeks " " \fIN\fR
Number of weeks to chart (default: 12).
.RE
.TP
.B body latest
Show most recent measurements.
.SS Data Management
.TP
.B data export
Export data from database.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-format " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Export format: csv or json (default: json).
.TP
.BR \-\-table " " \fITABLE\fR
Specific table to export (omit for all tables).
.TP
.BR \-\-output " " \fIPATH\fR
Output file or directory path.
.RE
.TP
.B data import
\fIFILE\fR
Import data from a file.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-table " " \fITABLE\fR
Target table name (required for CSV).
.RE
.TP
.B data backup
Create a database backup.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-output " " \fIPATH\fR
Backup directory path.
.RE
.TP
.B data restore
\fIPATH\fR
Restore database from backup.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompt.
.RE
.TP
.B data optimize
Optimize database for better performance.
.SS Configuration
.TP
.B config list
List all configuration settings.
.TP
.B config get
\fIKEY\fR
Get a configuration value.
.TP
.B config set
\fIKEY\fR \fIVALUE\fR
Set a configuration value.
.TP
.B config reset
Reset configuration to defaults.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompt.
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION SETTINGS
.TP
.B default_weight_unit
Default weight unit: lbs or kg (default: lbs)
.TP
.B default_measurement_unit
Default measurement unit: in or cm (default: in)
.TP
.B enable_rpe
Enable RPE (Rate of Perceived Exertion) tracking (default: true)
.TP
.B enable_tempo
Enable tempo tracking (default: false)
.TP
.B rest_timer_default
Default rest timer in seconds (default: 90)
.TP
.B auto_detect_pr
Automatically detect personal records (default: true)
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Initialize and Start Using LIFT
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Initialize the database
$ lift init

# Start your first workout
$ lift workout start

# List available exercises
$ lift exercises list

# Search for bench press variations
$ lift exercises search bench
.RE
.fi
.SS Log a Workout Session
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ lift workout start --name "Push Day"

# The interactive session will prompt you:
Exercise: bench press
Set 1 > 185 10 8
✓ 185 lbs × 10 reps @ RPE 8.0

Set 2 > s
✓ 185 lbs × 10 reps @ RPE 8.0

Set 3 > +5 8 9
✓ 190 lbs × 8 reps @ RPE 9.0

Set 4 > done

Exercise: overhead press
# ... continue logging
.RE
.fi
.SS View Statistics and Progress
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Show personal records
$ lift stats pr

# View progression for a specific exercise
$ lift stats exercise "Bench Press" --chart

# Check weekly training summary
$ lift stats summary --week

# View training streak
$ lift stats streak
.RE
.fi
.SS Manage Training Programs
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Import sample programs
$ lift program import-samples

# List available programs
$ lift program list

# View program details
$ lift program show "PPL 6-Day"

# Activate a program
$ lift program activate "PPL 6-Day"

# Start workout from active program
$ lift workout start
.RE
.fi
.SS Track Body Measurements
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Log bodyweight
$ lift body weight 185.5

# Log full measurements (interactive)
$ lift body measure

# View weight history
$ lift body history --measurement weight --weeks 12

# Display weight chart
$ lift body chart weight --weeks 8

# Compare progress
$ lift body progress --weeks 4
.RE
.fi
.SS Export and Backup Data
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Export all data to JSON
$ lift data export --format json --output my_workouts.json

# Export workouts table to CSV
$ lift data export --format csv --table workouts --output workouts.csv

# Create a backup
$ lift data backup --output ~/backups/lift_backup

# Restore from backup
$ lift data restore ~/backups/lift_backup
.RE
.fi
.SS Configure LIFT
.PP
.nf
.RS
# View all settings
$ lift config list

# Change to metric units
$ lift config set default_weight_unit kg
$ lift config set default_measurement_unit cm

# Enable tempo tracking
$ lift config set enable_tempo true

# Set default rest timer to 2 minutes
$ lift config set rest_timer_default 120
.RE
.fi
.SS Use Custom Database Location
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Initialize database in custom location
$ lift --db-path ~/my_workouts.duckdb init

# Use custom database for commands
$ lift --db-path ~/my_workouts.duckdb workout start

# Set via environment variable
$ export LIFT_DB_PATH=~/my_workouts.duckdb
$ lift workout start
.RE
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LIFT_DB_PATH
Path to the database file. Overrides the default (~/.lift/lift.duckdb) but is overridden by
.BR \-\-db\-path .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.lift/lift.duckdb
Default database file location.
.TP
.I ~/.lift/lift.duckdb.wal
Write-Ahead Log (WAL) file for the database.
.SH DATABASE SCHEMA
The database includes the following main tables:
.TP
.B exercises
Exercise library with 137 pre-loaded exercises and custom exercises.
.TP
.B workouts
Workout session records with date, duration, and notes.
.TP
.B sets
Individual set logs with weight, reps, RPE, and tempo.
.TP
.B programs
Training program definitions.
.TP
.B program_workouts
Workout templates within programs.
.TP
.B program_exercises
Exercise prescriptions with target sets, reps, and RPE.
.TP
.B personal_records
Personal record tracking (1RM, 3RM, 5RM, 10RM, volume).
.TP
.B body_measurements
Body measurement and tracking data.
.TP
.B settings
Application configuration settings.
.PP
The database also includes analytical views for efficient querying:
.BR workout_volume ,
.BR weekly_muscle_volume ,
.BR exercise_progression ,
.BR bodyweight_trend .
.SH EXERCISE CATEGORIES
.TP
.B Push
Pressing movements (bench press, overhead press, dips, etc.)
.TP
.B Pull
Pulling movements (rows, pull-ups, deadlifts, curls, etc.)
.TP
.B Legs
Lower body exercises (squats, leg press, lunges, leg curls, etc.)
.TP
.B Core
Core and abdominal exercises (planks, crunches, leg raises, etc.)
.SH MUSCLE GROUPS
Chest, Back, Shoulders, Triceps, Biceps, Forearms, Quads, Hamstrings, Glutes, Calves, Abs, Obliques, Lower Back
.SH EQUIPMENT TYPES
Barbell, Dumbbell, Cable, Machine, Bodyweight, Bands, Kettlebell, Smith Machine
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution
.TP
.B 1
General error (invalid input, database error, etc.)
.SH NOTES
.SS Progressive Overload
LIFT automatically tracks your progression and can detect when you've achieved new personal records. The system uses multiple 1RM calculation formulas to estimate your strength levels.
.SS RPE (Rate of Perceived Exertion)
RPE is a subjective measure of how difficult a set felt, on a scale typically from 1-10. An RPE of 8 means you could have done 2 more reps before failure.
.SS Database Performance
The database is optimized for analytical queries. Running
.B lift data optimize
periodically can help maintain performance with large datasets.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/parkerdgabel/lift/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Parker Gabel.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 Parker Gabel. License: MIT
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH SEE ALSO
Full documentation: https://github.com/parkerdgabel/lift
.PP
Related tools:
.BR sqlite3 (1),
.BR duckdb (1)
